---
slug: i-simply-am-not-there
title: I  SIMPLY AM NOT THERE
year: 2024
additional:
  - string: Danske Grafikere, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2024.
carouselImages:
  - url: /assets/I_simply_am_not_there_installation_view_3_1000px.jpg
    caption: Installationsview, Danske Grafikere, 2024.
  - url: /assets/I_simply_am_not_there_installation_view_4_1000px.jpg
    caption: Installationsview, Danske Grafikere, 2024.
  - url: /assets/Apartment_3_1000px.jpg
    caption: "_Apartment #3,_ Silver geletin print, 60x80 cm, 2024."
  - url: /assets/works/DG_I_simply_am_Not_there/Apartment_2_1000px.jpg
    caption: "_Apartment #2,_ Silver geletin print, 60x80 cm, 2024."
  - url: /assets/works/DG_I_simply_am_Not_there/Apartment_1_1000px.jpg
    caption: "_Apartment #1,_ Silver geletin print, 60x80 cm, 2024."
  - url: /assets/I_simply_am_not_there_installation_view_1_1000px-1.jpg
    caption: Installationsview, Danske Grafikere, 2024.
  - url: /assets/object_1.jpg
    caption: "_Object #1,_ 40x60 cm, Baryta print, 2023."
---
<p>If the pots by Italian architect Aldo Rossi (1932-1993) – the coffee pot <em>La Conica</em> and the tea kettle<em> Il Conico</em> designed for Alessi in 1983 and 1986 respectively – had been part of the inventory of Patrick Bateman’s apartment in <em>American Psycho </em>(1991), we would have known. The narrator and main character in Bret Easton Ellis’s novel happily and consistently lists everything he surrounds himself with, owns and uses, sometimes repeatedly. For example, we are told on both pages 62 and 64 that the shoes he is wearing are crocodile skin loafers made by A. Testoni. Bateman appears to be an influencer before social media existed: he gives tips and advertises exclusive brands as he goes about his morning routine – not to earn money from sponsors, but to ‘show the money’, as it manifests on his body, in his home and around the people he associates with.</p><p><br><br><em>American Psycho</em> is a catalogue of the brands and designs anyone who would want to venture into the yuppie milieu of 1980’s New York should know. But the book is also a reflection of its protagonists’ materialism- obsessed as they are with flashing their style and their knowledge of it, painting a picture of “the ennui of morally bankrupt extreme privilege.”[1] In the conversations between Bateman and his colleagues, women are also reduced to brands that denote where they come from and what type of value they reflect: <em>Vassar / Camden / Queens</em> ... Among the book’s protagonists, there is a constant exchange of objects, locations and people (for Bateman there are always new clothing brands to desire, a new place to eat, a new woman to date or kill, movies to rent and clothes to pick up or drop off). Desire lies in the pursuit of the next and newest item – a version of an accelerated consumer culture on coke.</p><p><br><br>It’s no surprise that the book and film became huge, albeit controversial, successes. The book, with its narrative style and detailed descriptions of characters’ appearances, details of the different spaces in which action takes place, and not least Bateman’s violent behaviour, already has a strong cinematic quality. Patrick Bateman tells his story as if it were a movie with “smash cuts,” “jump zooms,” and “pans” and detailed descriptions of his emotional reactions to the action that is unfolding around him – jealousy, clenched fists, and other physiological reactions. As readers, we are invited to see the world through Bateman’s eyes, but he himself is not there. He is pure projection, imagination, mirroring:</p><p><br></p><p>…there is an idea of a Patrick Bateman, some kind of abstraction, but there is no real me, only an entity, something illusory,and though I can hide my cold gaze and you can shake my hand and feel flesh gripping yours and maybe you can even sense our lifestyles are probably comparable: <em>I simply am not there.</em> (<em>American Psycho, s. 794</em>)</p><p><br></p><p>Therefore, it seems only fair to introduce Rossi’s stainless steel pots, so shiny that you can see your own reflection in them, in the middle of Bateman’s universe. Through a series of digitally rendered images that Jonas Handskemager has animated for the exhibition ‘<em>I simply am not there</em>’, we are confronted with this imaginary encounter. Here, the two design icons are placed in the middle of the glass table in Bateman’s living room. There might be a slight hesitation here before realising that the image is not a still from the film or a photograph of the film’s scenography. In the animations, the apartment reflects itself; the surfaces of the pots reflect spots on the ceiling and the glass tabletop mirrors the pots. The apartment is an empty place, an open place, a place that exists only in the space of the animation, fantasy or the imagination. The intervention in the narrative and its visual world continues Bateman’s preoccupation with smooth, shiny surfaces of steel, glass, marble and silver, such as the kitchen, in which “large glass-front cabinets ... make up most of an entire wall ... complete with stainless-steel shelves and sandblasted wire glass, it is framed in a metallic dark gray-blue.” (<em>American Psycho, p. 61</em> ). The reflecting surfaces of the animated objects reflect the self-absorption of the narcissist, where everything revolves around the individual in question. In Bateman’s own words: “Since it’s impossible in the world we live in to empathise with others, we can always empathise with ourselves.” (<em>American Psycho, p. 539</em> ). Just as Bateman surrounds himself with design icons, through the reception of the book and the film, he himself has become a condensed image of a superficial, materialistic, narcissistic culture. At its most extreme this culture has manifested Bateman – a beautiful, articulate and lean psychopath who hides his murderous tendencies beneath a charismatic facade. If Aldo Rossi’s kettle and coffee pot had been part of Bateman’s household, they may have been the focal point of a breakfast or murder scene, depending on the main character’s mood: “Patricia will stay alive, and this victory requires no skill, no leaps of the imagination, no ingenuity on anyone’s part. This is simply how the world, my world, moves.” (<em>American Psycho, p. 165</em> ). This reinterpretation of the objects’ function both resonates and contrasts with Rossi’s position as a designer.<br></p><p><br>Rossi was preoccupied with accumulating forms and employing them in new contexts and with new functions, just as he was interested in the meeting between architecture and design and the individual and collective memories associated with them. Rossi’s postmodernism is characterised by the use of quotations, reinterpretations and repetition: “in my projects, repetition, collage, the displacement of an element from one design to another, always places me before another potential project which I would like to do but which is also a memory of some other thing.” (Rossi_, A Scientific Autobiography, p.20_)<br></p><p><br>In Handskemager’s exhibition, the displacement of both objects and cinematic space, which takes place through digitally rendered images, gives occasion to consider the glossy and smooth as characteristic of <em>American Psycho</em> and it’s main character. The subtle displacement and amplification of the book’s style clarifies a point about consumer fetishism: to attach a promise of satisfaction to a fetishised object, one fixates its qualities so that it cannot move, shift, or respond; it becomes an object which does not exist outside the subject’s imagination.<br></p><p><br>At the same time, the use of quotation in Handskemager’s works punctuates this fixing fetishism and serves rather as an example of the possibility of reinterpreting objects and environments alike. This artistic strategy points to a shift in meaning of objects and environments depending on the context they are placed in. In Rossi’s own words – “(t)he emergence of relations among things, more than the things themselves, always gives rise to new meanings.” (Aldo Rossi, p. 19). The presence of Rossi’s pots in Bateman’s apartment echoes another image from Handskemager’s exhibition which is a photograph from Rossi’s personal archive – a snapshot of his coffee pot <em>La Copula</em>, which he himself is reflected in as he photographed it. There is a tendency to read Bateman’s psychopathology as a result of the consumer culture he is a part of, but if we turn the fiction on it’s head once more and imagine Aldo Rossi lived in Bateman’s apartment, surrounded by his belongings, what would have happened? We can imagine that things were sent into circulation – not to kill, but to create new objects and forms. Rossi would probably have turned the apartment into an inhabited place; with freshly brewed coffee.</p><p><br><br><br>Text Anne Kølbæk Iversen, PhD, researcher, curator, editor, and writer</p><p>Proofreading Sam Derounian</p><p>The exhibition is kindly supported by Statens Kunstfond and Københavns Kommune Rådet for Visuel Kunst Thanks to: warrenn81, Sidse Thorup Poulsen, Ebbe Stub Wittrup</p>