---
slug: example-work-five
title: STUDY OF PLANTS AND MUSIC
year: 2023
additional:
  - string: Study of plants and music, public commission w. Ebbe Stub Wittrup, The
      Radiohouse, Copenhagen, 2023.
carouselImages:
  - url: undefined
    caption: _The Study of plants and music,_ documentation film, 2023.
    videoUrl: <div style="padding:54.05% 0 0 0;position:relative;"><iframe
      src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/860482757?h=9a494c5ca1&amp;badge=0&amp;autopause=0&amp;player_id=0&amp;app_id=58479?autoplay=1&loop=1&autopause=0&muted=0”
      frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen; picture-in-picture;
      clipboard-write; encrypted-media"
      style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;"
      title="Study of plants and music documentation (eng
      subs)"></iframe></div><script
      src="https://player.vimeo.com/api/player.js"></script>
---
<p><em>The roof is green. It was covered in earth so plants could take root and sprout there, and so the roof can burst into bloom every time a new spring arrives. Nature stands on top of music, as though notes were also the roots and the fertilizer of this little forest. A piece of landscape that grows and blossoms and wither alongside symphonies beneath it. A tree with cello or brass sounds in its trunk.&nbsp;</em></p><p><br><em>Is peace more distinct, does it get a more tangible body in the context of what we consider nature, or is this merely something we have agreed upon because landscapes are silent. Because landscapes are the opposite of a house. Long before music there were plants, and long after humans, the notes they composed will be audible: there must be different eternities, one of the Earth, one of the arts. And here is a moment: an architectural moment and a musical moment and a biological moment where everything exists side by side, giving something to the others and taking something from the others.</em></p><p><br><em>-&nbsp;</em></p><p><br></p><p>Jonas Handskemager and Ebbe Stub Wittrup have scattered 4 loudspeakers across the roof of The Radio House in Copenhagen, sown them like seeds in the rooftop garden which was a pioneering architectural decision, when Vilhelm Lauritzen took it in the 1930s. It is a rather secret garden, squeezed between windows and stairscases to provide rehearsing musicians with the possibility of drawing the most sprouting breath possible. Take their tranquil breaks. And now the newly sown loudspeakers will make the garden melodic, they’re connected to rooms below the organic roof where music takes shape and is being refined. Rehearsing clarinets or violins stream into the garden, music itself ascends through the root system in order to properly inhabit nature. Never will orchestras make gardens bloom, but that plants too are alive and can soak in symphonic beauty, this is something we know. That human hearts and states of minds, that also leaves and flowering and deflowering, can be nurtured and tended with the emotional infinity of music, this is something we know.&nbsp;</p><p><br></p><p>Next to the sounds: the gaze. Just as the house and its sounds is drawn up into the garden and the air, the sky is drawn down into the house. 8 round windows in the Radio House ceiling – yet another architectural vision about having inside and outside meet – have had their panes replaced with camera obscura lenses. And so, the world is mirrored and poured into whichever open eyes that would be standing in the middle of a regular day, in the middle of a regular corridor, looking up. The garden and the clouds and the peculiarities of any regular day are turned upside down and brought inside, down through these light pits in the roof, down through the enigma that a camera obscura is. A beautiful or un-beautiful reality is simultaneously transmitted and splintered in the lenses, the world probably always looks like the mood of the eyes, but inversions of familiar moons and birches above us cultivate the imagination. Keep looking and listening.&nbsp;</p><p><br></p><p>A study of plants of music is an attempt at approaching and contributing to the synthesis that Vilhelm Lauritzen established eight decades ago: inside the house are melodies, a sun or a darkness, alternating skies, green life, human life and art, and on top of the house are melodies, a sun or a darkness, alternating skies, green life, human life and art.&nbsp;</p><p><br>Nanna Friis, art critic</p><p><br><br><br><br></p><p>Film production crew</p><p>Director <em>Émile Sadria</em></p><p>Producer <em>Émile Sadria</em></p><p>Director of Photography <em>Troels Rasmus Jensen</em></p><p>Editors <em>Jesper Fabricius, Oliver Hyttel Reddersen</em></p><p>Sound<em> Ludvig Jakob Trier</em></p><p>Voice over text by <em>Nanna Friis</em></p><p>Voice over artist <em>Janus Kodal</em></p><p>Colourist <em>Olesya Kireeva</em></p><p>Colourgrade <em>Storyline</em></p><p>Production<em> Delta Productions</em></p><p><br>The project is supported by Danish Art foundation, Danish art workshops<br></p><p><br>Thanks to: The Royal Danish Academy of Music, Storyline, Delta Productions, Augusta Møllemand Jensen, Vilhelm Lauritzen Architects</p>